Methods
Ten veterans (1 female; median age = 56.0 yrs, range = 39 to 67 yrs) who met Structured
Clinical Interview for DSM-IV criteria for schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder
participated. Subjects were receiving stable doses of antipsychotic medication, with five
also receiving stable antidepressant medication, for at least six weeks prior to enrollment.
Antipsychotic dosage was calculated for each patient in olanzapine equivalents according
to Leucht et al. (24) (mean dosage = 13.67 mg/day, SD = 10.82). Patients with significant
medical or neurological conditions, or diagnosis of substance use disorder within three
months of enrollment, were excluded. The Washington DC V A and Georgetown University
Institutional Review Boards approved the study; all subjects provided informed consent.
Schwartz et al. Page 2
Clin Schizophr Relat Psychoses. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 June 20.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
The intervention was a 12-week (3 days/week) combination aerobic and strength training
program supervised by an exercise physiologist. Subjects exercised at the Washington DC
V A Wellness Center according to individualized plans. The intervention consisted of 30
minutes on a treadmill, stationary bicycle, or elliptical trainer augmented by weight training
for upper and lower extremities. The intensity of aerobic exercise was determined for each
participant and was set at 60% to 80% of peak heart rate achieved during a standard
treadmill test, taking into consideration the individual’s resting heart rate. Subjects were
encouraged to keep their heart rate within the target range using heart rate read-outs on the
exercise equipment.
Assessments were performed within 7 days of the start and end of the intervention. Aerobic
capacity was assessed using the exercise treadmill test. Peak aerobic capacity was measured
by metabolic equivalent (MET), estimated with standardized equations on the basis of peak
speed and peak time for the Bruce protocol (25). Serum BDNF levels were quantified using
an enzyme immunoassay (Quantikine® ELISA Human BDNF Immunoassay). The Positive
and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS; 26) was used to assess symptoms. In the spatial
memory task (also administered at week 6), subjects viewed one, two, or three dots on a
computer screen and after a 3-second delay judged whether a single dot was in the same
or different location as one of the previously presented dots. In the pattern separation task,
subjects performed an incidental task on pictures of objects followed by a test in which they
identified targets (previously presented items), lures (visually similar to targets), and foils
(new items) (27). The measure of pattern separation is correct identification of lures.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was conducted on a 3T Siemens Trio. Data for the
high resolution T1-weighted structural scan were acquired with echo time (TE) = 2.52
ms, repetition time (TR) = 1900 ms, field of view (FOV) = 256 × 256 mm2, voxel size
(isotropic) = 1mm, and 9° flip angle. For resting-state functional MRI, whole-brain images
were acquired using T2-sensitive gradient echo planar imaging with TE = 30 ms, TR =
3000 ms, FOV = 205 × 205 mm, voxel size = 3.2 × 3.2 × 3mm, and 90 o flip angle,
during a 5 mins/51secs scan. CONN functional connectivity toolbox was used to perform
standard preprocessing and denoising steps, including slice-timing and motion correction,
spatial normalization (resampled at 2×2×2mm) into MNI standard space, smoothing (8mm
kernel), nuisance regression (6 motion parameters, CSF and white matter signal, and
high motion volumes, i.e. > 3 standard deviations of average signal or >.5mm framewise
displacement (16.6 +/−17 for pre, and 14.5+/−15.9 for post) “scrubbed”) and bandpass
filtering (0.008-0.09 Hz).
Based on findings of functional segregation along the horizontal axis of the hippocampus
(28, 29), we used a mask in SPM Marsbar (30) to divide the hippocampus into anterior,
body, and posterior regions of interest (ROIs), resulting in three ROIs in each hemisphere
(total = 6 ROIs). Time series for each ROI were correlated to that of every other voxel in
the brain (Pearson’s correlation r values were transformed to Z scores), which produced a
whole-brain connectivity map for each subject at pre and post-intervention that was entered
into paired t-tests in CONN to test for second level FC differences. To avoid the potential
for inflated false positive inference errors (31) for pre-post intervention differences, we
used parametric statistics in CONN that is based on random field theory assumptions (32,
Schwartz et al. Page 3
Clin Schizophr Relat Psychoses. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 June 20.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
33), using a voxel- based height threshold of P < .001 combined with FDR-corrected
cluster-level P < .0083, which is corrected for the number of seeds based on Bonferroni
correction (P < .05/6).
